Good morning, everybody.
Welcome to session 108,
Taking Advantage of Spotlight.
My name is Jonah Petri,
and I'm an engineer
on the Spotlight team.
And today, we're going to be taking
you through a few things.
We've got a lot to cover.
So here's what we're going to do.
The first thing we're going
to cover is Spotlight,
a little bit of an update on
what we have in Leopard and
some review of our existing API.
We're going to cover document lineage,
which is a new feature that
we are trying out in Leopard.
We're also going to cover Quick Look,
which is a way to preview
your custom document formats.
And you're also going
to cover Spotlight Help,
which is a way for you to index
features of your application.
So let's get started.
So with Spotlight in Leopard,
we wanted to extend
what we'd done in Tiger.
And in order to do that,
we decided that the first thing we wanted
to do was to show some recent items.
And the first thing that you see
when you bring up the up the window.
We show you the five most
recent items in every category.
So those would be the five most
recent documents or the five most
recent images that you've looked at,
for instance.
We also wanted to cover a little
bit more advanced searching.
There were many requests that people
really wanted to get a little bit more
precisely at the documents they wanted.
And so we've put this advanced
search interface-- let me blow
that up a little so you can see it.
What this allows you to do is specify
arbitrary attributes to search on.
And it also lets you do more
full Boolean searching in the UI.
You can see here that the search that
I've done is for items on my computer
where either the keywords contain
yellow or the keywords contain green.
And I found some images where
there's maybe a green snake and maybe
something about Yellowstone Park.
So we think this allows you to do that.
And you can also do some more powerful
searching and maybe get at the
documents that you want more precisely.
We've also allowed you to do
server searching in Spotlight.
This means that anything that you're
connected-- any Leopard servers
that you're connected to over AFP,
and that includes personal file sharing,
you can search by selecting the
Servers tab in the Where pop-up.
And that Where pop-up appears
when you press the Custom button
in the Spotlight window.
Another thing that we've put into
Spotlight is integrated previews.
So let's say you're browsing
around a couple images.
You can see I used that advanced
search UI again to search for things
where the keywords contain leopard.
And I've got a bunch of
pictures of leopards,
but I can't really tell if
that's the one that I want.
So we allow you now to pop up
sort of an integrated preview,
and this uses the QuickLook architecture
that you'll see later,
to preview your documents in line
without opening the application.
So we've added a very often-requested
feature for an advanced query syntax.
This is just an example,
but we let you do arbitrary,
true and false, and Boolean expressions,
and we also allow you to search
specific attributes in the query syntax.
This syntax might be somewhat
familiar to those of you who've
used Google or other search engines.
It's sort of an evolved language there.
So this example I'm
showing how to search for,
anything that matches tiger,
where the kind is not an image.
And so I've come up with a movie,
and maybe some email messages,
and some PDF documents.
We also allow you to do
arbitrary Boolean searches.
So this is an example with or.
You can also use and,
and you can also use parentheses.
So this is I'm finding anything that's
a PDF or that has the keyword leopard.
Sort of a strange search maybe,
but that's just a good example of an or.
So we've taken the UI definitely places,
and we've got further to go with
that before we ship leopard.
But what we need from you most of all
is we need to allow the user to search
your document formats more richly.
And we need you to allow them
to preview them more richly.
And in order to do that,
we have to understand
your document format.
And for that, you need to tell us a
little bit about that.
And the way that you tell us
about your document format is
by writing a spotlight plugin.
And the way that these things
work is these are CFPlugins that
sit on your hard drive,
and they declare to us, spotlight,
a set of handled file formats
in the form of UTI types.
And when they're called,
they extract metadata from a given
file and allow us to add that
metadata to the spotlight index.
And so we're going to go over
how to build one of these.
But some first, some general rules.
If you're going to be
building a spotlight plugin,
you should publish metadata
that facilitates user searches.
Some published metadata that
the user might search for.
Sort of obvious.
Also, allow for richer previews of the
documents using the metadata.
So make sure you publish authors or
keywords or these sorts of things that
the user might see in a preview of their
document to understand that that really
was the document that they were looking
for or maybe to compare two documents.
Please don't use your spotlight importer
as a database for your private data.
That just slows down
everybody else's searches,
and we're not really guaranteeing that
you're going to get everything back,
so it's just not a good idea.
Also,
please don't use your spotlight importer
as a database for your private data.
That just slows down
everybody else's searches,
and we're not really guaranteeing that
you're going to get everything back,
so it's just not a good idea.
Also, please don't use it for icon
previews or other blobs of
data that it can't be searched.
Also, remember that too much
noise can confuse the user,
so be judicious in what data you publish.
Also, there's no user interface
allowed in these things.
We disallow connections
to the Windows Server,
and so you won't be able to pop
up any authentication dialogs.
or any other kind of UI, for that matter.
So now that we've gone over some rules,
let's take a look at what these
things are actually composed of.
Metadata in the Spotlight system is
in terms of attributes and values.
There are many predefined attributes
that you can take advantage of,
and we urge you to take advantage
of these because it allows for
richer previewing between documents.
Some of the predefined
attributes you see there,
we cover title, authors, keywords,
projects.
There's also document type-specific
attributes such as pixel height
or width or maybe audio bit rate.
And you can look at the
full list of attributes.
There are many, many,
many of them in mditem.h,
and that's in the metadata framework
under the core services framework.
We also allow you to store
localized attributes.
These are attributes that appear
differently to different users depending
on their current language settings.
For instance, an application's name might
be localized in multiple,
in different localizations,
and you might want to store
that in the display name.
And so you can see here that you
can use a CFDictionary with key
value pairs for each language code.
And in this example,
I'm using address book,
and you can see that we've localized
it in German and English and Italian.
And you can also see that the
empty string is used as a default
localization to fall back on in
case the user is using a language
that you have not localized for.
So, we also ship many pre-built
importers on the system.
So if your application deals in
terms of one of these document types,
you may not have any work to do.
We ship, you know,
you can see this is not an exhaustive,
list, I don't think,
but it covers a lot of
different data types.
So you might want to look to
see if you're already covered.
Maybe you don't have any work.
But I suspect that many of you
that have a custom format have not,
we've not written an
importer that covers it yet.
So here's the steps that you
need to do to write an importer.
The first step you need is to start with
the Spotlight plugin template in Xcode,
then edit the Info.plist that
comes with the plugin,
implement the
getMetadataForFile function,
and then install your importer.
And please test it a little bit
before you release it on the world.
So the Spotlight plugin template
in Xcode is pretty easy to find.
You can see it right up there.
It's in the new project dialog.
And this lays down a lot of
pre-built glue code for you that
you basically don't need to touch.
Stuff that's sometimes easy to get wrong,
and we've just done the work for you.
So please take advantage of that.
Once you've done that,
edit the Info.plist.
The key that you need to pay
attention to the most is the
UTI type that your importer handles,
and that's declared in the
LSItemContentTypes key.
This is a pretty well-commented XML file,
so you should see where everything goes.
You should list your UTI or
UTIs that your document importer
is going to cover there.
It's also possible to
define your UTI here,
but we really urge you to
define your UTI in your
applications P-list if possible,
because UTIs are fairly
mature at this point,
and that's really the proper
place to be putting them.
Once you've done that,
edit the other informational fields
like bundle name and version,
and be careful not to just use your
search and replace for everything
com.apple to com.yourcompany,
because there are some fields
that need to be com.apple.
Look in the P list.
Don't use the big hammer.
Just tread carefully.
Then once you've done that,
implement the code.
There's this stubbed-out function
that comes with the template,
getMetadataForFile.
You're passed a path to the file that we
want you to extract the metadata from,
as well as a CFMutable dictionary
to add the attributes to.
Please be careful to extract
the metadata efficiently.
Be aware that your metadata plugin
is being run in the background while
the user may be using their machine.
And so you don't want to have an
impact on the user experience.
So you have to be careful
in terms of CPU usage,
disk usage, memory footprint,
and all other sorts of
performance-related considerations.
Once you've done that,
please install your importer.
You can install it in two places.
We allow you to install
it in Library Spotlight,
which would be where you would put it
if you were doing a standalone importer.
Or maybe if you wanted to put it there
as part of... a larger install package.
We also allow you to put
it within your application.
This is useful for drag installs,
or it's actually a little
bit more friendly overall.
So we like to recommend
that you do that if you can.
So the precedence that
importers are loaded in,
and first one wins, by the way,
is Library Spotlight,
then the system-installed importers
in System Library Spotlight,
and then your app-bundled importers.
Once you've done that,
you should be able to run your importer.
And test to make sure that new
documents that are created are
actually imported properly.
So a couple tips.
Please use the standardized
attribute names.
This really does allow
for users to more...
Richly compare documents between each
other and also search more precisely.
Take advantage of the text content.
This is really useful for
contents of text documents,
as you can see from the label,
but it also might be used for things
that you might not have thought of,
like maybe the comments
field in a calendar event,
in a calendaring program.
Or maybe if you have large
collections of song lyrics.
All of those can go in that field.
Another tip is to, if you can,
delete the schema.xml and
schema.strings if you don't need them.
You'll see in those files the
types of things that they cover.
It has to do with advanced attributes,
I'm sorry, custom attributes,
as well as defining
custom document types.
But if you haven't edited those,
chances are you can just delete them.
And please check your
performance with mdimport-p.
mdimport is a tool that we ship that
allows you to test your importers.
You can type mdimport and then a file
name and it will import that file.
It's a command line tool, by the way.
And the -p option allows you to
give it a folder hierarchy of files
and it will import that entire
folder hierarchy and then report
performance statistics for you.
We really want you to be careful
about performance because these
things really do impact user
perceived performance on the system.
So again, a couple things to be aware of.
Please be aware of how much
memory and CPU you're using.
And don't allocate huge
buffers just to read large,
large,
large amounts of data only to pick out
a small section to use for the metadata.
Please don't blindly reuse your code.
We do encourage you to reuse your code,
but be aware if it's going to inflate
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds
of objects into the system only to
extract a small amount of metadata
that may have a large impact.
And the reason really why we want you
to be careful about your performance is
that if we're importing - if we're doing
an initial scan of the user's drive,
you may have thousands of documents
of your document type on the
user's drive and you have to scale
your importer to those thousands
and thousands of documents
without hurting the user too much.
So just please be aware of
performance in this case.
So, if you have a custom file format,
please write an importer.
This will really help us integrate your
documents into Spotlight and it will
help the users find your documents and
they'll thank you for that for sure.
Otherwise, please put useful metadata
into your documents.
This allows us to present richer
previews to the user and if you're going
to use our APIs to present previews,
it allows you to present
richer previews to the user.
Please preserve metadata
in existing file formats.
And what I mean by this is, let's say,
by way of example,
you're writing OpenOffice and you're
opening up Microsoft Word documents.
If the user has bothered to enter
an author or a title or comments
into the document properties window,
when you're reading in that
file and writing it out again,
take care to preserve those
so that we don't lose those.
Because that's really user data
and please don't lose user data,
I guess, is the message.
And please come visit us in the lab.
Many people last year came to our
importer session and then came over
to the lab and had a draft of their
importer written before they left.
And so we really think that
we can help you and we're
happy to help you with this.
So, next.
We're going to do a quick overview
of the Spotlight API before we
move on to document lineage.
So, what do we allow you to
do with the Spotlight API?
Well, first we allow you to
access metadata for a file.
This is useful if you want to
throw up a properties dialog
or maybe a get info panel.
And the way that you do this is
using the MD item ref object.
And you can look up the MD item ref
API reference in the documentation.
It's pretty thorough.
An MD item ref in this case represents
a file in the metadata database.
And you can ask it about its title or
its subjects or its keyword or project,
whatever metadata it has on it.
So in order to retrieve
metadata from a file,
there are three simple steps.
The first, you have to create an
MD item ref for the file.
Then you have to obtain a list
of available attributes and
then retrieve the metadata.
I'm going to walk you
through this pretty quickly.
So MD item create is the function
you use to create an MD item.
Surprise.
And you use a CFString to
represent the path to the item.
Once you have your item ref there,
you call MD item copy attribute
names to get the list of names of
attributes that that MD item ref
has and then call MD item copy
attributes to get out a CFDictionary of
attribute names to values.
And that's going to look
something like this.
Now, of course,
some of you may be saying, well,
that's all well and good,
but that's not very pretty.
I can't show that to the user.
They'll say, KMDItemContent,
what the heck is that?
So we also allow you to get
pretty localized display
names for the attributes.
And the way that you do that,
what I mean by that is
instead of KMDItemAuthors,
you can get authors.
And in order to get that,
you use mdschema.copyDisplayName
for attribute.
We also allow you to get localized
descriptions of the attributes.
And you please use
mdschema.copyDisplayDescription
for attribute.
And that will return something
like localized name of the file for
KMDItemDisplayName in case the user wants
to get a little bit more explanation
about what this attribute really means.
So that's how you retrieve metadata.
Now on to what we really
built Spotlight for,
which was searching.
There's a couple ways
to implement search.
The first is really simple.
It's a one-liner in code.
It allows you to open the Spotlight
window and present it as if the user
had typed that search string that you
provide into the Spotlight window.
This is very fast to implement.
The second is to use the
AppKit-level NSMetadata Query API.
This is a Cocoa API that's
bindable and works very nicely if
you are using that level of API.
We also allow you to use a core
foundation-level MD Query API.
That's the lowest-level API and
the one that I'm going to be going
into the most depth for here,
but please come to us with
any questions that you have.
So opening the Spotlight window.
Like I said, this is a one-liner,
H-I search window show with
just a string to search.
And this will open the Spotlight
window as if the user had
just typed it in themselves.
This is great if you want
really simple integration.
You can see this in
TextEdit and AddressBook.
And this is good to just present
a quick search to the user if you
think that's a convenient thing
for that point in your application.
The disadvantage to this is that you
have no possible interaction with
the Spotlight window after this.
It's sort of fire and forget.
The search is up and you can't figure
out what the user chose or what they
might have done with the result set.
So if you want to do any of that,
you have to use one
of the other two APIs.
The first one I'm going to talk
about is the NSMetadataQuery API.
This uses NSPredicate,
which some of you may be familiar with,
which is an expression evaluating
true or false across the entire
set of objects on your system.
And this finds the files matching
the provided predicate and also does
things like stores the results and
groups the results by their attributes
and also is a bindable model object,
as I mentioned.
So you can just hook this right up in
Interface Builder and very quickly have
a working Spotlight searching window.
So a couple more details.
You can also iterate this manually
if you don't want to use bindings.
The results are available by using
these result count and result at index.
And you could imagine a for loop that
iterates the result set pretty quickly.
And this NS Metadata Query
also has a value list.
And what I mean by this is
that this allows you to say,
hey, my 15 documents that were a result
of my search only have three authors.
So what are those three authors?
Or I have 250 MP3s that match my search,
but they cover three genres.
And so you could list the genres
in sort of an iTunes-esque view.
So this allows you to quickly evaluate
certain statistics about your result set.
And you can sort also.
So also very useful.
And you can group them by
their attributes values.
So you can ask for, given a genre,
show me the list of MP3s within
this search that match that genre.
So onto the MD Query API.
So the key object to be aware
of here is the MD Item Ref,
which we covered before.
In this case, it also represents a
result from the query.
And an MD Query Ref,
which represents a query string,
as well as the results that
resulted from that query.
So the query language that we
use for the MD Query API is a
simple C-like expression language.
You see the attributes are on the left
and the expressions are on the right.
In this case,
I'm searching for anything whose
content type is public.rtf.
This will be pretty familiar
to any of you that use C,
which I assume is all of you.
We allow you to use strings
and numbers and dates.
We support many operators.
For strings,
we have equals and not equals,
and star can be used as a
wildcard in your patterns.
And for numbers and dates,
we support all the sorts of arithmetic
operators that you might expect.
We also allow you to do logical
groupings and/or parentheses,
also logical not.
And another little detail is that star
can be used to mean any metadata if
it's on the left side of the expression.
Here's an example where
star matches Boston.
And what this will find is any
items whose metadata matches Boston.
So once we've covered that,
there's a couple things you can
do with string match modifiers.
This is specific to string matching.
You can't use this for
number matching or anything.
And we use this because exact match
is often not what users expect.
There are three supported
modifiers that you can use.
The first is C,
and this means that the comparison
is done case-insensitively.
This means that text edit, all lowercase,
would match text edit, uppercase.
D also similarly means
diacritic insensitive.
So resume without any diacritic
marks will match resume
with the accents on both Es.
The third one is a little more subtle.
It's W,
and this means word-based matching.
This means that we compare the
pattern that you provided against
each word in the value list of
the item that we're evaluating.
So in this case,
utility would match disk utility because
there's a word that looks like utility.
But parity is important.
So if you're using a word
that looks like utility,
you're going to have to match it with the
value of the item that you're evaluating.
So in this case,
utility would match disk utility because
there's a word that looks like utility.
But parity is important.
So if you're using a word
that looks like utility,
you're going to have to match
disk utility with the value of
the item that you're evaluating.
but Paris would not match comparison.
Even though Paris is in there
in the middle of the word,
it's not a whole word itself.
And the W modifier is implied
for KMDAtemTextContent in
Tiger as well as in the developer
preview that you have today,
but it might not be so in the future,
so be aware of that when you're
structuring your queries.
So here's a couple example queries.
The first one's pretty easy.
This is just find all documents
where the number of pages is
greater than or equal to 100.
You can also search in arrays.
We have array-valued
attributes in Spotlight.
So in this case,
KMDAtemAuthors is an array-valued type.
You can have many authors for a document.
So this will find any item where one
or more of the authors is Jonah Petri.
So the way that we decide if something
matches or not in an array situation is
if any of the items in the array match,
then we consider the whole
attribute to have matched.
And the bottom one is the
typical Spotlight menu query.
If you typed... WWDC into
the Spotlight menu,
this is the query it would produce.
So let me walk you through
this pretty quickly.
The star on the left, remember,
means search all metadata for WWDC star,
so any words that start with WWDC,
and CDW, so case-insensitive,
diacritic-insensitive, and word-based.
And also the same thing for text content.
Text content is not implied by star.
That's a little subtle,
but you can see that in any
of the queries that we have.
So this is basically what
the Spotlight menu does.
So this is basically going to
find any document where WWDC is
the start of any word anywhere,
which is sort of why Spotlight is cool.
So here's a couple more queries.
Just quickly, I'm not going to spend
much more time on this,
but this is maybe to whet your appetite
for what you can do in your app.
So here's a query that will find all
images with a DPI of greater than or
equal to 300 and have an alpha channel.
Maybe you've got a 3D app and
you're looking for textures.
The second one will find
all the sound effects,
matching thunder from one
to five seconds in duration.
Good for an audio editing app, right?
All right, so hopefully that gave you
some incentive to use this API.
So on to how to actually use it.
The first thing you need to do
is to create an MD Query ref,
then register a callback
for your updates,
and then execute the query.
Creating an MD Query ref is pretty easy.
MD Query create with the query
string as the second parameter.
Then register a callback for
these specific notifications.
There are three notifications that
Spotlight sends to the Notification
Center as it evaluates the query.
The first one is the KMD Query
Progress Notification,
and this is sent while results
are being gathered by the server.
The second one is the KMD Query
Did Finish Notification,
and this is sent once when
the query is completed.
And the third one is the
KMD Query Did Update Notification,
and this lets you know that
some aspect of the query has
updated after it's finished.
This is only really sent when
you've asked that the query update
you after it's finished with
its initial results gathering.
One thing to be aware of
is that new in Leopard,
because we're allowing these
servers and other high-latency
sources to be searched,
it's possible to get updates on
your query before some stores
in your query have finished.
So this shouldn't matter
to too many people,
but just be aware of that.
And again,
that update notification is only
sent when you've asked for it.
And the way you ask for it is
while you execute the query,
calling mdquery execute.
You can see there,
we had our query ref from before.
And the first parameter is
the query you want to execute,
and the second parameter has these flags.
And if you pass the
KMD Query Synchronous flag,
that means the call is going to block
until all the query results are done.
Or otherwise,
it would return immediately and only
do the notification callbacks for you.
The other flag you can pass is
the KMD Query Wants Updates.
And that's the one I mentioned
before that means that your
query is going to be live,
meaning that if the user creates a
new document that matches your query,
you will get notified that a
new document has been added.
Or if the user alters a document such
that it doesn't match your query anymore,
that document will fall out of
the result set and you'll get one
of these update notifications.
So the way that you iterate
the result set is pretty easy.
You call mdQueryGetResultsCount,
and that will return a count
for how many results there are.
Then you call mdQueryGetResultAtIndex
inside a for loop to get
each item in the query,
and then you process the items
probably using the MD item
API as we discussed before.
There's one thing to be thinking about
when you're doing this is that if you're
doing this on a thread separate from
the one that the query is running on,
you have to be careful
about thread safety.
And the way that we allow you
to do this is that we have
these... So what I mean by that,
actually, is that the results that can
change out from under you,
and this is not a thread-safe object.
We're not going to try to, I don't know,
have this count update all the time.
It's just, you know,
you have to be careful.
And so the way that we allow
you to be careful is we have
this mdQueryDisableUpdates
and mdQueryEnableUpdates
calls that you can make.
And if you bracket your
loop with these calls,
you can be sure that the result set won't
be changing while you're iterating it.
So that's how you
prevent threading errors.
So a couple things that you can do
with mdquery that are sort of advanced.
The first thing you can do
is you can use search scopes.
And this scopes your search to a specific
subdirectory or set of subdirectories.
That's mdquery/searchscope.
You can also do sorting.
All this is covered in the API,
by the way.
Please come and see us in the
lab if I'm going too fast.
You can also use sorting,
and that's the fourth
parameter MDQuery creates,
you can see there,
is a CFRARef of attribute names.
And it's also possible if simple
ascending search is not what you want,
to provide your own custom
sort comparator using
MDQuery set sort comparator.
The other thing that you can do with
the sorted attributes is that you
can use them to prefetch attributes.
This is very good for performance if
you know that you're going to be getting
at these attributes to use them every
single time you go through your array.
What I mean by that is that if you
were going to be using MD item copy
attributes to copy the attributes out of
your item as you're processing each one,
each call that you do with that
involves a message down to the Spotlight
server and all the way back up to you.
That can be very performance intensive.
If you use your sort attributes
as prefetched attributes,
you can basically avoid that
round trip and it's very,
very fast to get at these attributes.
The way you get at the
prefetched attributes is using,
when you're in your for loop,
use MD query get attribute
value of result at index.
It's kind of a mouthful,
but that'll return you, in this case,
the KMDI item content type if you had
added that to your sort attributes.
You can see there.
value is now, say, public.data.
So some quick performance tips,
how to make Spotlight the
fastest you can in your app.
The data store is optimized
for the typical Spotlight menu
case that we went over before.
Case and diacritic
insensitive search is fast.
Word prefix search is fast,
and that means you have a
star on the end of the word,
not at the beginning.
And the word-based search is fast.
So that query that we went over
for WWDC for the Spotlight menu
case before is a very fast query,
and if you structure your
queries after this query,
I think you'll find that you get very
good performance out of Spotlight.
If you're not finding good
performance out of Spotlight,
maybe you're doing some of these things.
The first thing to be aware of
is that file system attributes
are not indexed by Spotlight.
Now,
those are the ones that start kmditemfs.
Maybe kmditemfs name is a good example.
These are not indexed,
which means that we have to fall
back to a traditional file system
walk to find these things for you.
So if you were searching
for kmditemfs name,
maybe you should be searching
for kmditem display name instead.
The other thing to be aware of is
that path scoping can be very slow,
because we have to resolve the path
for every item before we can check
to see if it's in that subdirectory
hierarchy that you provided.
And you may think that you're doing us a
favor by scoping to a small subdirectory,
but really check your
performance with the whole drive,
because that actually may be faster.
The exception to this rule
is a little counterintuitive.
The scoping to... a query to the root
of a volume is actually very fast.
So just something to be aware of.
And if you're having any
performance problems with Spotlight,
or if you just want some advice,
please come to the lab,
because we're happy to help you.
So now I'm going to quickly cover
document lineage and what this is.
This is a new feature that
we're trying out for Leopard.
And this is a way for you
to find multiple copies of a
document within your system.
And what I mean by way of example is,
let's say I'm writing a novel.
And so I've got this novel
that I'm typing up in TextEdit.
And I'm writing and I'm
writing and I'm writing.
And I decide, hey, this is pretty good.
Let me call this my first draft.
And so I do a save as in
the TextEdit interface.
And I save another copy of my document.
And I call it finished first draft.
Well,
now I have two copies of this document.
Maybe they're different.
Maybe I continue to
work on my first copy.
And then maybe I decide I want
to send my finished first draft
to my editor for her to look at.
And so I email it to her.
And it comes back.
And now I've got a third
copy with her comments.
And so you can see this sort of workflow
develops a family of documents that
aren't exact copies of each other.
But they're definitely related.
And even further than that,
maybe I've integrated those
changes from the commented first
draft into my original document.
And so you can see there's
this complicated relationship
in this document family.
And we really think it's going
to be great if users could find
these documents as a family,
as a group.
And we want to enable this in Leopard.
But what we need to enable it is
a little bit of help from you.
And what I mean by that is that
We need some help from you in the
Save As case or when you are moving
documents around in a way that we
can't understand implicitly from
what you're doing on the file system.
And so in order to get this cooperation,
we built it into NSDocument.
So if you're using NSDocument
for your application,
you are basically all set.
If you want to get this
functionality in the Leopard preview,
you have to turn on this default.
Defaults write dash G.
NSDocument should write lineages, yes.
And come see us in the lab if
you want to work with this.
In other cases,
we need you to use the MDLineage
APIs in order to mark this file
as needing lineage tracking.
And the way that you do that,
for instance, in the initial save case,
is you need to create a lineage for
the document using MDLineageCreate,
and that will create a new lineage,
a new unique lineage for this document.
And then you set it on the
file that you just wrote out.
And please do this only
for user documents.
We've tried opting everything in
the system into the lineage system,
but it ends up being a pretty big burden,
so we don't really want to do that.
So if you're saving a user document,
do something like this to mark the
file as belonging to this new lineage.
And then that lineage will track the
file as it moves around in the system.
The other time that we need your
help is if you're doing a save as.
We need to mark this new file
that's been created somewhere on
the file system as being related
to the original file in order for
them to be found as a group later.
And the way that you do that is that you
use MDLineageCreate branch from file.
To create a new lineage that is marked
as a branch from the original file.
And then you set that new
lineage on the document.
And this will allow us later
to mark these in the UI somehow
as being related to each other.
And allow users to find them.
So, as I said before,
NSDocument has full-lineage
support built into it,
so if you're using that,
you don't need to worry about this.
If you're not using NSDocument and
you're doing safe-save style writing
out of documents where you write
out a temp file and then you move
it over the file that was originally
there so that you have atomic saves,
please use this FSReplaceObject API.
And the reason that you might want
to use this is that not only will it
preserve the lineage on the document,
but it will also preserve
other things on the document,
such as other extended attributes or
access control lists that may be set.
And I know a lot of you have written
your own code because we haven't provided
a function that did just this before,
but this is really good that we're
providing this now in Leopard.
This works for document bundles as well
as documents as well as plain files.
And it basically works as atomically
similar to what we're doing in the API.
And so you don't really have to
figure any of this stuff out anymore.
If you want more information on that,
come to the lab and we can
direct you to the right person.
But if you can't use either of these,
then you've got to manually
maintain the lineage.
And the way that you do that is
just another little lineage API.
If you're writing out your temp file,
before you move it
over the original file,
call MDLineageCreateFromFile.
This will copy the lineage
off of the existing file,
the old file that
hasn't been deleted yet.
And then once you've moved the file over,
call MDLineageSetOnFile,
which will replace the lineage
on the new file with the
lineage of the original file.
And that will maintain the lineage
and allow these documents to
be found as a family later on.
So I think the bottom line
for that is if you can,
please use FSReplaceObject
or NSDocument because it does
all of this for you for free.
But we want to provide these APIs so that
you can do it in your app if you've got
your own custom code that's doing saving.
So with that,
I'm going to turn this over to
Toby for a look at Quick Look.
Thanks, Jonah.
Hi, I'm Toby Paterson.
I manage the Quick Look team,
and unsurprisingly,
I'm going to tell you a little
bit about Quick Look today.
So we're going to cover the
basic architecture of Quick Look.
We're going to talk about a
little bit of terminology.
We're going to find out what
a Quick Look plugin does
and how you can write one.
First, what is Quick Look?
Quick Look is a technology for
providing document previews that
we're building into Leopard.
You saw an introduction to the
Quick Look preview panel if you were
at the keynote session yesterday,
the State of the Union.
We're going to talk a little
bit about what goes behind that,
how we start with the document,
feed it into the Quick Look system,
and pop it out the end
in the preview panel.
The goal of Quick Look is to
help you find your documents.
We're going to talk about how
to build documents more quickly.
And to that end,
we're building the panel into Spotlight,
into Time Machine, and into Finder.
There's other places where
Quick Look can help out.
If you're using File Sync
to synchronize your iDisk on
.Mac with your local computer,
then occasionally you may notice that
you get conflicts if you modify the
same file on two different computers.
Quick Look can help provide more
information in the conflict resolver
panel than we give you today in Tiger.
So we kind of bandied the term previews
about a little bit generically,
but we actually have two very specific
definitions that we talk about.
A thumbnail is a static image
that gives you a hint as to
the contents of the document.
It's not too rich,
but it provides a bit more information
than just the document icon.
Thumbnails are used inside a Spotlight.
In the results list,
we display the little icon
next to all of the items.
And if you click on the info button,
we expand inline to give you
a larger icon and present a
little bit more information,
a little bit more metadata
about the document.
Finder, of course,
uses thumbnails inside in the icon view.
A preview is designed to
give the user a more faithful
representation of the document.
It's a richer format, PDF,
QuickTime movies, etc.
We want the user to be able to
navigate through their document.
If it's a keynote presentation,
we want them to be able to navigate
through the slides to find exactly
the one that they're looking for.
But we draw the line at editing.
If you want to edit it, you open it up.
Previews are displayed in the context
of the QuickLook preview panel.
[Transcript missing]
So, the alternative,
if you don't want to pay the
cost of those trade-offs,
or if your document is not a bundle,
is that you can write a
Quick Look plugin to create
thumbnails and previews on demand.
A Quick Look plugin is a CFPlugin.
It implements a simple interface.
There's two functions:
one to create a thumbnail,
one to create a preview.
And you use API in the
Quick Look framework to provide those
thumbnails and previews to the client.
Your plugin is loaded into
the Quick Look Daemon.
The Quick Look Daemon serves to
provide a bit of a sandbox for you.
No offense,
but we don't particularly want
to load all of your code and all
of your libraries into Finder,
into Spotlight, into Time Machine,
into all of these places.
And you probably don't want to
be running in there yourself.
It's a little bit hostile if
everybody's all packing in there,
competing for resources,
so on and so forth.
So we've created this Quick Look Daemon
that will fire up to load your
plugin and run you in a safe,
known environment.
When somebody comes along and asks
for a thumbnail or for a preview,
we'll find your plugin,
we'll load your plugin,
and we'll ask it to give us
a thumbnail or a preview.
So, how do you write a Quick Look plugin?
There's four basic steps.
You start with the Xcode template,
you edit the Info.plist,
you implement the generate thumbnail,
generate preview functions,
and you install your plugin.
If you've written a
Spotlight plugin before,
this should be pretty familiar for you.
The actual mechanism is identical.
So let's start with the Xcode template.
We provide a basic boilerplate for
you so that all you need to do is just
go and fill in some of the blanks.
The boilerplate has an Info.plist,
it's got an implementation of Ion Known,
all of the factory methods,
so on and so forth.
There's two blanks that
you have to fill in.
The first of these is the
Info.plist to associate your
plugin with your document type.
So you just specify one or more
UTIs in the LS item content
types there in your Info.plist.
The next blanks that you have
to fill in are the two simple
functions to create a thumbnail
and to create a preview on demand.
We give you the URL of the
document that we're asking for
a preview or thumbnail for,
content type.
We give you the URL of the
document that we're asking for
a preview or thumbnail for,
content type.
of the document and a few other
options in the case of a thumbnail.
How big do we want the thumbnail to be?
You then turn around when we call
you and use the Quick Look framework
to provide us with your
thumbnails or with your previews.
In the case of the thumbnail,
if you've got a CG image ref somewhere,
if you're using Core Image or
something like that to produce it,
you can just give us the image directly.
Alternatively,
we can give you a CG context into
which you can do all of your drawing.
When you're done your drawing,
you call flush context on up,
and that's your cue to us to tell
us that the thumbnail's done.
We can take that, create an image,
and pass it off to the client.
Similarly, for previews,
there's two functions to create a
CG context into which you can draw.
The first of these creates an image,
and that's an image context.
That's appropriate if your document's
just sort of a single-page type of thing.
Alternatively, if you're something like
Keynote or OmniGraffle where
you can create multiple pages,
you use the PDF.
You can create a PDF context
and use the usual begin page,
end page,
and create a multi-page document.
You get your context,
you do your drawing into it,
just like normal, and when you're done,
you flush the context.
That tells us to take the preview,
package it up,
and deliver it off to the preview panel.
Installing your plugin?
Also pretty straightforward.
We use launch services so you can
stick it in a well-known location,
like Library Quick Look if
you don't have an application.
If you have an application,
we encourage you just to stick
it in the application bundle,
as Jonah suggested for
the Spotlight plugins.
Now that being said,
that's actually not working right now.
So in the seed build that you have today,
you need to explicitly tell us where to
look for that preview using the default
that you can see on the screen there.
Don't worry too much about the details.
In the sample code
associated with this session,
we've got a sample of
a Quick Look plugin,
which documents in pretty good
detail what you need to do to get
yourself up and running with this.
I'm going to talk a little bit
about some advanced stuff now.
Canceling requests, concurrency,
and a nod towards performance.
Canceling requests is
pretty straightforward.
Let's say the user's opened
up the Finder window,
Finder's come off and asked
us for 10,000 thumbnails,
and then the user closes the window.
We've got our own fairly
advanced request management,
so we're not going to fire off
all 10,000 requests at once,
but we do try and sort of manage
multiple ones a handful at a time
just to get greater parallelism.
If your thumbnail generation or if your
preview generation takes a bit of time,
there's ways that you can
either poll us to find out
whether it's actually worthwhile
continuing to do the... request.
Alternatively,
you can receive an asynchronous
notification by implementing
two optional methods in the
QuickLook plugin interface,
which we'll call out of band in
another thread to let you know,
hey, pack up, go home,
nobody's interested anymore.
Out of the box, we're going to assume
you're not reentrant.
It's just the safe thing to do.
We would very much like
you to be reentrant,
and so if you are,
just add this key into your Info.plist,
and that tells us that we
can run multiple instances.
If you're plugin in the
same QuickLook daemon,
that's going to help the throughput.
It's going to reduce the system overhead,
and everybody's going to be
happier in the end because of that.
Conversely, we assume the frameworks
that you use are reentrant.
Now, in the event that you're
using a framework that other
generators might likely be using,
which are not reentrant,
you need to tell us about that by adding
this needs-to-be-run-in-the-main-thread
key into your Info.plist.
And that's our cue to know
that we should only run you
in your own quick look daemon,
and we won't load you up with anyone
else who has a similar flag set.
On the performance front,
thumbnails need to be really, really,
really fast.
If it takes a long time
to generate thumbnails,
we're going to make finder wait.
Users are going to get aggravated.
Everybody's unhappy.
So you need to make a trade-off
there between the quality of the
thumbnail that you generate and
the time it takes to generate it.
Previews, on the other hand,
they just need to be fast.
We're not going to fire off
hundreds of these simultaneously.
It's usually done in
response to a user action.
The Quick Look preview panel itself
supports asynchronous loading.
So we can do that in the background,
but you still,
you don't want to make the user
wait too long staring at the
spinning progress button there.
And so we think concurrency
is a good thing.
We encourage you to support parallel
requests by being reentrant.
Asynchronous cancellation so
that we can stop things when
we don't need them anymore.
So just a quick recap here then.
The things you should remember.
There's two kinds of Quick Look previews,
thumbnails and previews in
varying degrees of richness.
The native Quick Look preview
types that we support are images,
text, PDF, HTML, rich text,
QuickTime movies, QuickTime audio.
You can pre-generate your
previews and your thumbnails
into your Quick Look previews.
You can pre-generate
your document bundle.
Or you can write a Quick Look plugin
to generate them on demand.
So with that,
I'm going to hand over to Christy Warren,
who's going to tell you
about Spotlight for help.
Thank you.
Thank you, Toby.
I'm here to talk about
Spotlight for Help.
How many of you attended the
State of the Union yesterday?
About half of you.
I'm Christy Warren.
I'm the lead engineer on this feature.
And what is Spotlight for Help?
Well, it's a shortcut to the UI.
It lets you access and invoke your
user interface via text search.
How many of you have launched like
Photoshop or Pages or Word and couldn't
find that menu right away and had
to go hunting through your menu bar?
Or dug through preferences.
I know I can set the
font inside a BB Edit,
but for the life of me,
I can't find where to
find that default font.
So there's all this
great UI I want to use,
but I can't find it.
So we made this tool that lets you--
Find it!
Now, this works for menus out of the
box for both Carbon and Cocoa.
Let me give you a quick
demo before we go on.
So here's this novel that Jonah started.
It was a dark and stormy night.
And I'm going to continue with,
he looked at me, but then I go, you know,
maybe I have a spelling problem here.
So I'm going to go to, I could go hunting
through the menus going,
hmm, where's the spelling commands?
Or I could click here and bring
up our new search the UI field.
And here if I type in spelling,
it'll populate the list below with
various commands for spelling.
And if I arrow down,
it'll indicate where it is in the UI.
And as I arrow through,
it'll select different items.
So in this case, I want to do spelling.
And I hit enter.
And it'll bring up the spelling dialing.
So it's not only a way to find your UI,
it lets you access and
execute it very quickly.
So those of you who are keyboard jockeys
could have a lot of fun with this.
So let's go back to the slides.
Spotlight, for help,
goes beyond just searching menus.
It can actually search your entire UI,
your preferences panels, windows,
palettes, anything in your application,
with some restrictions,
which we're going to deal with later.
Developer adoption is
required to search other UI,
however.
So at a minimum,
you need to run this analysis tool
and generate a custom index that's
built and stored with your application.
This builds a persistent
model of your UI,
and it can be used to
uncover these deeply buried
features in your application.
So to create an index,
you run your application under Xcode,
and there's a new item in the
debug menu called Run Executable
and Index UI for Help.
For this seed version,
it doesn't do anything yet, but for GM,
it'll actually do the
application probing.
I'm going to give you a
preview of that right now.
So please switch to the demo machine.
So here's a little application I wrote
that gives some examples of hidden UI.
I don't recommend you
design your app like this,
with a lot of ugly controls and stuff.
But stuff like this happens.
Here's a tab view that mirrors a
preference panel in some applications.
There's a top-level tab
view that you can select.
And there's even a nested tab view.
So how am I going to find my way around?
So I'm going to quit that.
And in Xcode,
I'm going to use our-- where is it?
Under Debug,
Run Executable and Index UI for Help.
And when I select that,
it's going to launch our application.
And look, I'm not doing anything.
What it does is it enumerates
all the visible UI,
which starts with the menu bar.
And for every menu item,
it fires off that menu item and sees
if a window appears or something
else interesting that it can explore.
In this case,
it found this tab view window,
and it's going through and
trying all the things to see
if they bring up other dialogs.
So it can do a complete
search of your application.
So it's running through.
It'll finish in a second.
And now that it's done,
we'll quit the app.
And you'll see down here,
it added a file to your project.
This is the index file.
And this will get automatically
built with your application and
stored in the resource bundle.
So it's fairly easy to do.
And now when we run the
application again...
Now if I type "help" and I type,
let's say the word "common,"
you'll see various entries came up.
And if I arrow through them now,
you saw it brought up the window
without doing anything and
pointed me to one of the controls,
"common."
Now it went to another one, another one.
Now it brought up the other window,
and it'll even go within the tab
view and reveal these things.
So, I think that's pretty cool.
Alright, let's go back to slides.
So what do you need to do in order
to create an index for your app?
Well,
you need to be friendly to the indexer.
You need to make your
application accessible.
And this has benefits beyond just
supporting Spotlight for help.
It helps users that may have difficulty
using computers in various ways.
And if you have a Carbon app,
there's two things we want you to do,
which is to modernize event
handling and to move to HIView.
So support help indexing,
there's kind of two issues
you need to deal with.
One is dangerous UI.
Here I have my household application,
and it gives me three options.
Erase my hard disk, launch rockets,
or open the doggy door.
Well, clearly,
when I'm running this app analyzer,
I don't want to do the first two.
So we need a way to disable
that kind of UI temporarily
while the analysis is going on.
Another related thing is,
most apps launch,
they put up a default document,
and that's kind of what we expect.
If you put up a gallery or license
screens or something like that,
we need a way to temporarily
not do that and put up a
default document window instead.
So how can we do this?
Well, one simplistic way is we can
create a help index compile flag
and use this flag to conditionally
compile out undesired code.
However,
this is clumsy to test and maintain.
So we decided to help you and
give you some Apple events in
Core Event Class Apple Event.
And these are sent, when the app launches
under this analyzer,
it'll tell it to set up for app
analysis and you can respond to this,
turn off all the undesirable UI.
And then at the end it'll tell you
that it's done with this so you can
restore your app to its normal state.
And how many of you used
Apple Events before?
Just a few of you?
Well, the good news is this is all
the code you need in order to
do this if you're a Cocoa app.
You basically get a shared
Apple Event handler and you
wire up selectors and targets
to handle these two events.
So you could literally copy this code
as boilerplate and paste your code into
the handle setup and handle finish.
And you're done.
You can do all your work from here.
Now for accessibility,
one of the trickiest parts
is many UI don't have
strings associated with them,
such as a text field.
In these cases,
when you search for "author," you
would like it to allow you to go
right to that text field rather than
have it highlight the word "author,"
because that's not very helpful.
So we can figure this out for
simple cases such as a text field
immediately to the right of the string.
However, to work well,
you should implement these
two accessibility attributes:
the title_UI_element attribute and the
serves_as_title_for_UI_element attribute.
And this will be good for users
who need accessibility as well.
Now, to improve indexing, out of the box,
if I search for "spell," it'll find
only the words containing "spelling."
However, to give us more stuff to search,
if you implement these attributes,
like the description attribute,
then we can search anything
within that description.
And that's very helpful.
So for details on how
to get accessibility,
please visit this link.
So for Carbon,
if you want this app analyzer
to work with your app,
you're going to need to modernize
your event handling a little bit.
The problem is if you
just do getNextEvent,
handle the event yourself,
and process it,
We don't get a chance to kind
of see what's going on and make
the deductions we need to do
in order to build our index.
So you should either do run
application event loop or install
event handlers on menu item selection.
And you can see this at this site.
Finally,
If you move your app to HIView,
we will get higher fidelity
indexing of the UI.
For example, those tab views and stuff
that we saw for Cocoa,
that only works for Cocoa.
But, you know, easily,
but if you implement HIB, you know,
in the future as we move on,
we'll be able to do that for
your Carbon apps as well.
So please, you know, consider doing this.
So to wrap up,
Spotlight for Help is a new
way to access and learn the UI.
It works your Carbon and
Cocoa out of the box,
and hopefully this is a very
modest effort that you have to
do to allow you to search other
UI within your application.
So please run the tool and generate
a custom index when it's available,
and implement some basic availability and
play well with the indexer if you can.
So to wrap up, we have a call for action.
If you have a custom document format,
please write a Spotlight plugin
and a Quick Look plugin so you
can work with those cool new UIs.
If you are not an
NS document-based application,
you know,
you have a custom document type,
please adopt the document and lineage
APIs and at minimum use FS Replace object
so that we can track all the metadata
and other information as we go along.
And adopt Spotlight
for help in your users.
If you do all these things,
your users will love you.
Thank you very much.
So we have these two
labs tomorrow at 5:00 PM,
and we have one on Thursday at 2:00 PM.
And you can contact Matthew Formica
for more information.
He's our evangelist.
Thank you.